INTRODUCTION 
Jwara  is a disease of  Rasavaha Srotasa  hav- ing its origin from  Amashaya , resulting due  to  Agnimandya  and presented with  Santapa   (raised body temperature),  Swedaavrodha  anhidrosis and  Angamarda  body ache as  its cardinal features.All most all the infec- tious diseases (viral/bacterial) presenting  with raised body temperature as predom- inant feature have been categorized under   Jwara . 
On the basis of predominance of  Dosha  and  Dhatugata Avastha, Jwara  has been classified  into various types and while deciding  the line of treatment, all these types are  to be considered. For deciding the line of  treatment, differential diagnosis among  the  Doshic  varieties,  Sama – Nirama Avastha,  Nava- Jirna Avastha  or  Dhatugata Avastha  or  other presentations like  Punaravartaka Jwara   are considered. 
Case Definition: 
Patients presenting with raised body temper- ature associated with anhidrosis, associated  with body ache, anorexia, headache, fatigue,  weakness and lethargy. 
Differential Diagnosis: 
Differential diagnosis is essential for diag- nosing the type of  Jwara  and its stage. For the  purpose of deciding line of management, the  following stages should be diagnosed.  
JWARA  (FEVER) 
•   Sama / Nirama Avastha of Jwara 
•   Taruna / Jirna Jwara 
•   Eka / Dwi / Tridoshaja Jwara 
•   Dhatugata Jwara 
•   Sharira / Manasa 
•   Agantuja / Nija Jwara 
•   Punaravartaka Jwara 
Jwara  due to specific conditions like  Romantika ,  Masurika ,  Pratishyaya ,  Kasa ,  Mutrakrucchra ,  Rajyakshma  etc. should be diagnosed and  treated accordingly.  
LEVEL 1: AT SOLO AYURVEDA  
PHYSICIAN CLINIC 
Clinical Diagnosis:  Patient should be  diagnosed on the basis of history of illness,  degree of fever, onset, associated symptoms,  chronicity, complications etc. The body  temperature above the normal range of  36.5–37.5 °C (97.7–99.5 °F) or temperature  in the rectum is at or over 37.5–38.3 °C  (99.5–100.9 °F) or temperature in the mouth  (oral) is at or over 37.7 °C (99.9 °F) or  temperature under the arm (axillary) is at or  over 37.2 °C (99.0 °F) shall also be taken into   account. 
Investigations:  
•   CBC 
•   Peripheral blood smear 
48  AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES 
JWARA (FEVER) 
Table 6.1: Medicines at level 1 for  Jwara 
Drugs Dosage  form 
Dose Time of  administration 
Duration Anupana 
Nagaradi Kwatha 1 Kwatha 10-30 ml Before meal 1 week - 
Guduchyadi  Kwatha 2 
Kwatha 10-30 ml Before meal 1 week - 
Parpataka Kwatha 3 Kwatha 10-30 ml Before meal 1 week - 
Godanti Bhasma 4 Churna 125-250 mg Before meal /  thrice a day 
1 week Warm water 
Samshamani Vati 5 Vati 2  Vati   (500 mg) 
Before meal /  thrice a day 
1 week Warm water 
Mahasudarshana  Churna 6 
Phanta 50 ml  Before meal /  thrice a day 
1 week Warm water 
Jwaramurari Rasa Vati 125-250 mg Before meal /  thrice a day 
1-2 weeks Water /  Madhu 
Table 6.2: Management of  Jwara  as per the  Doshik  predominance at level 1 
Vataja Pittaja Kaphaja Vata - Pittaja Pitta -  Shleshmaja 
Vata -  Shleshmaja 
Guduchyadi  Kwatha 
Patoladi  Kwatha 
Chaturbhadra  Avaleha 
Chandanadi  Kwatha 
Kantakaryadi  Kwatha 
Dashamula  Kwatha 
Drakshadi  Kwatha 
Duralabhadi  Kwatha 
Nimbadi  Kwatha 
Guduchyadhi  Kwatha Nagaradi Kwatha Pippalyadi  Kwatha 
Rasnadi  Kwatha 
Vasadi  Kwatha 
Abhayadi  Kwatha 
Bharangadi  Kwatha Patoladi Kwatha Panchakola  Kwatha 
Vishwadi  Kwatha 
Parpatakadi  Kwatha 
Vasa Kantakari  Kwatha 
Ushiradi  Kwatha 
Panchatiktaka  Kwatha 
Darvyadi  Kwatha 
* Ruksha Sweda  in  Vatashleshmaja Jwara 
Line of Treatment: 
•   In Sama or Nava Avastha of Jwara,  patients shall be kept on fasting or  light diet. 
•   After perspiration and some relief  in  body-ache,  headache,  light  
liquid diet or medicated water like  
Shadanga Paniya  with few of the  medicines mentioned below can  be given considering the type of  Jwara  and its cause. In the  Nirama  or   Jirna Jwara  following medicines can  be given as per requirement along  with diet restrictions . 
JWARA (FEVER) 
  AYURVEDIC STANDARD TREATMENT GUIDELINES  49 
Pathya  -  Apathya  (Diet and life style): 
Do’s -  
•   Ahara :  Shadanga Paniya  (medicated  water prepared by  Musta, Parpataka,  Ushira, Chandana, Nagara, Udichya),  Tarpana  prepared of the  Laja Saktu  ( Churna  of perched paddy) mixed  with honey, sugar and juices of  fruits,  Mudga Yusha. Yavagu  (gruel),  odana  (boiled rice) and  Laja  (popped  or perched paddy),  Peya  prepared  with  Laja / Yava  added with  Nagar,  Pippalimula,  Amalaki,  Mrudvika,  
vegetables like  Patola, Karavellaka ,  Karkotaka. 
•   Vihara :  complete bed rest, staying in  well ventilated room with hygienic  conditions 
Don’ts –  
•   Ahara :  Heavy food, curd, green  peas, black eyed beans, lentils,   yellow gram, black gram, raw vege- tables and salads, refined foods such  as white flour ( Maida ), contaminat- 
Table 6.3: Clinical features as per  Doshik  predominance 
Vata Vepathu   (shivering) 
Vishama Vega  (irregular  intensity) 
Kanth-oshtha Shosha   (dryness of  throat & lip) 
Nindranasha (insomnia) 
Shirahshoola   (headache) 
Pitta Tikshna  Vega  (high  intensity) 
Atisara (diarrhoea) 
Nidraalpta   (diminished  sleep) 
Vami (Vommiting) 
Mukhapaka   (sore in mouth) 
Kapha Gaurav  (heaviness) 
Sheeta (cold) 
Utklesha  (nausea) 
Romaharsha   (horripilation) 
Atinidra   (exessive sleep) 
ed water or food, sprouts, cold food  and beverages, junk foods, fried  food, bakery items. 
•   Vihara :  Physical and mental exer- tion like physical exercises, expo- sure to cold, breeze, suppression of  natural urges, taking bath with cold  water etc. 
Referral Criteria:  Patient not responding to  above management, patient presenting with  signs of high grade fever, delirium, severe  vomiting, posing danger of dehydration or  any such other complications like bleeding,  anuria etc. shall be directly referred to  Level 3 or higher centers for emergency  management. 
LEVEL 2: CHC’S OR SMALL  HOSPITALS WITH BASIC  
FACILITIES 
Clinical Diagnosis:  The case referred from  Level 1 or newly diagnosed case must be  evaluated thoroughly. At this level, line of  treatment to be planned considering  Doshika   involvement and cause of the  Jwara .  
